some serious readers out there.
Oh, of course, of course.
But they get older and older.
It's like going to concerts.
I go to a lot of concerts.
And it's amazing how old the audience has become.
You know, there actually are studies.
They've actually done formal studies of the people who attend symphony concerts.
But they also say that they've been looking at this for years, and they always seem to be older people.
Yeah, that may be true.
They were much younger when I was younger.
But I guess, and this is a question I'm sure you're asked often, and it comes to mind.
I was at a talk that Grace Paley gave.
I was at this conference of literary critics and scholars in Boston, which just wrapped up yesterday.
kind of to observe and to hear what the debate is.
But somebody asked Grace Paley, do you have a reader in mind when you're writing?
And she said herself and a few close friends, I guess.
But I wonder how, I mean, you certainly must get a lot of mail from the people who read your books.
Yeah, I do.
And you must have a sense of, if not a visual sense, but you must have an idea of who your audience is.
I really don't.
Because I do write for myself the way Grace does.
And my mail comes from such a disparate audience.
You know, women whose normal reading might be Rosamund Pilcher, is that her name?
Yeah.
Oh, God.
And women who have PhDs and are teaching at one university or another.
And 15-year-old girls.
Really?
And women in their 70s.
I really don't know...
who out there is reading me.
You don't know who's reading you, but do you have a sense, but I think you already answered the question.
So you aren't writing then for a specific reader.
You're writing mainly, you're writing for yourself, I gather.
I'm writing for myself, of course.
You can't really write any other way.
So it's your ear that matters and your sense of humor and your sense of everything, I guess.
Yes.
As to the kind of novel, I guess, that you'd like to read yourself.
I remember being heartbroken when I finished writing Our Father because I liked it so much, I wanted to keep writing it.
Really?
How about men?
Do you hear from men?
I do.
The occasional men.
Not as much now as I used to.
And far more for a book like Beyond Power.
In fact, I think probably with Beyond Power, more than 50% of my mail came from men.
Really?
who would be much more likely to pick up a book like that.
But do you find that they say, gee, I expected, I like this, I was led to believe that I wouldn't like it?
I mean, I think that would be, I hope that if men, the men that might have a preconception, you know, going back to the 70s, you know.
I don't know, maybe that might be true with the mail for the women's room.
But most of them said my wife or girlfriend forced me to read this, but, you know, I'm so glad she did, blah-de-blah.
That was the women's room.
They don't write to me about other books that way.
And Beyond Power was clearly their own discovery and their own enlightenment.
And they very often write to offer me their own philosophy in contrast to mine.
But it's usually a friendly letter.
I mean, I don't think I've gotten any nasty letters about it.
um and the work in progress is a as a work of non-fiction kind of a memoir isn't it but you said and uh do you have a title for that that you can tell me so far i'm calling it a season in hell wow and i don't know if that title will last it's pretty good though i mean it's quite powerful i've got plenty of material here we've talked for 45 minutes and uh um
I'll get right on the piece, and I'll certainly make sure that you get copies.
I'll send them to your publicist in New York.
Okay, great.
Do you have an address to send them to?
I can send one directly to you if you'd like.
Yeah, would you please?
I'd be happy to, sure.
Send it to 105 Duane Street.
D-W... D-U-A-N-E.
D-U-A, Duane Street.
New York, New York.
Okay.
I'm sorry, what's this up again?
07.
Okay, great.
And apartment 48B.
Excellent.
Well, this will be along quickly.
I'll get this out within the next two weeks.
I've got next week's piece.
Actually, I'm doing Hirsch's book on the schools we need.
I mean, you know, for next week.
Again, here we are.
It's almost a parallel of what you're saying as far as reading.
I mean, everything is going...
In the wrong direction.
Yeah, it's a terrific furor about the wrong point.
Yeah.
And, well, let's hope we can reverse it.
I've got two daughters who are a couple of years away from going to college, you know.
Well, they're probably readers.
My children are readers.
My children are.
You know, it's all that early training and in a lot of households the TV is on.
12 hours a day, if not more.
Well, there's no TV here at all during the week.
I mean, it's portioned.
And my daughter, my older daughter, actually reads maybe twice as fast as I do.
I can't believe that she reads that quickly, but she's been reading since she was two years old or whatever.
It's just amazing.
It amazes me that there are still people young who enjoy reading.
That's great.
Well, thank you very, very, very much.
I've enjoyed this.
Okay.
And congratulations to you, Nick, for all your successes.
Thank you, Doctor.
And I didn't say it when I began, but let me say I truly enjoyed the book.
And it's wonderful.
And I didn't know anything about these other stories about how
about how it came to be, and I promise you I'll treat it with the proper respect, and I hope you like the piece.
So take care.
Okay.
Thank you.
Bye-bye.
Bye.
Sentinel, it's called The Rest of Us, and it's a column, I don't think it's, it's sort of stands astride op-ed and features.
It's a little more political than a lifestyle column, but it's not really about
you know, Bill Clinton and, you know, his strategy for a second term.
And it's not about how to take coffee stains out of the water.
No, it's not about, like, oh, those darn kids, they say the nuttiest thing, you know.
So some of it is about that.
It always is a little, it has a little more of an edge than that.
And it's,
Syndicated now.
Good.
Who syndicated it?
Tribune Media.
Really?
That's Chicago, right?
Yeah.
The reason I syndicate myself, which is supposed to be impossible.
Wow.
And I've got 22 papers.
In fact, I think I'm talking now to the Wisconsin State Journal, and I'm hopeful they're going to take it.
They took me before, and then...
And then this newspaper or this newsprint fiasco, which really was terrible.
Yeah.
Because I was going gangbusters.
It really has been terrible.
Oh, trying to sell stuff is ridiculous.
I had the hardest time.
They wanted to hire me after.
Can I go off your record for me?
Sure.
I'll just shut up.
One of the reasons they were most suspicious back on the record now is that.
Yeah, I just put the machine on you.
Okay.
Is that...
You know, they said the same thing that my publisher, The Viking, said when my agent turned up with his novel, which is where she's been all her life.
Hmm.
You know?
Isn't that wonderful?
And it is wonderful.
I mean, they said, well, if this is this good, and it is, why didn't the journal do this a long time ago?
Hmm.
So I had to explain that.
Everything is hindsight for these people.
Well, everything is hindsight for everybody.
Why didn't I fall in love with you 20 years ago?
I mean, everything is hindsight for everybody.
I don't mind as long as, you know, all's well that ends.
Now, tell me the story.
I guess you would have been thrilled with a $5,000 advance, and that's kind of... Yeah, Diane, that would have... Are you Jewish?
No, but I appreciate the nuances.
It would have been enough.
And it, yeah, I would have been happy with that.
But the good water faucet apparently was turned on when this book was published.
So what do you think is striking?
What do you think certainly emboldened them to make such a generous offer?
And what do you think they see in the audience?
I guess I'd like to move into the story and I guess who you perceive your audience as as well.
I thought that my audience would be women in their 30s and 40s primarily.
But I've been shocked as I've gone around the country to see how far down and up it reaches and how it crosses genders.
And I guess Viking understood that, but I didn't.
Most women are the writers of most books, or the buyers of most books, most hard-covered books.
We certainly all know that.
I didn't know that, but I'll believe it.
Hardcover fiction is purchased by women.
So certainly it's important to appeal to them.
And I guess that, I don't know, I think it, I guess it ultimately has more to do with the nature of the characters than it does the story itself.
Because I know that when I read
I want to feel... I'm sorry for all the kids in the background.
That's not to worry.
I want to feel some shock of recognition and some weigh-in, a weigh-in.
And that's what they say.
I don't know.
I mean, I really... This whole thing puzzles me beginning to end.
I have to tell you the truth because...
I'm not savvy about trends in publishing and what kinds of books are co-wronged.
And I certainly, I mean, I know that what I asked Jane to try to get me $10,000 so I could take a leave of absence and finish the book.
And I thought that it would be from, you know, running Wolf Press.
I didn't have any idea that this book had this kind of commercial potential.
Really?
No.
Come on.
I'm not.
I mean, come on.
And I haven't finished it, by the way, so don't tell me how it ends.
But I mean, it's certainly a very suspenseful book, and there are themes here that are decidedly mainstream, you know.
Well, I'm a mainstream kind of chick.
I mean, I did not craft this book, and, you know, you can ask my dad.
I mean, I didn't craft this book with the idea.
I mean, it's a performing art, and I certainly want to, and still do want, as many people to read it as is possible.
I mean, I don't believe, I believe that books are meant to be read and not just by an elite few.
I mean, I think that books are stories, and stories are meant to be shared.
And so I wanted a lot of people to read it, but I really didn't craft it thinking that it would have a broad commercial audience.
It was the story that I wanted to tell, and it was the story that I had had a dream about, and there it was.
Now tell me about that, the dream.
I know, that also sounds kind of... New age-ish almost.
Like what?
Like new age stuff almost.
Yeah, and if you knew me, if you were sitting here...
you could not meet anybody who's more once-born than I am.
Okay.
But I had this dream about three and a half years ago, and I really dreamed the whole plot of this novel.
I could tell the people's names and everything else.
And this had happened to me exactly once in my life, so I took it seriously, and I was really beguiled partly by the story and partly by the
What do I want to say?
The issues about memory and identity.
Well, tell me about, pardon me for being so specific here, but tell me about the dream.
I mean, do you remember you woke up?
Were you in a sweat?
Did you realize something extraordinary had happened?
I didn't wake up feeling something extraordinary had happened, but I woke up before dawn and I wrote it down.
Oh, you did write it down.
Yeah, sure.
Because I knew that if I went back to sleep, it would be all over.
And...
I mean, I wrote it down on a notebook next to the bed, and I keep them all over the house, you know, because to write shopping lists and ideas for columns and stuff like that.
I do the same thing.
Yeah.
Well, most people do who do this kind of stuff.
That in itself is not unusual.
But I woke my husband up, and he was mad, you know, that I woke him up.
But he was impressed with the story and the complexity of the story.
And said, like everyone else, well, you should write that down.
But I had, like all of us, no time to do that.
And then he got sick about six months later and died just a few months after that.
And for the next year, my life was consumed by trying to establish some sort of
routine and trying to make decisions about what I would need to do, what kind of compromises I would need to make to raise my children.
And then a friend of mine, a good friend of mine who's a novel writer, encouraged me to try to write this story.
At first she would say, well, can you set aside an hour a day?
Who was the novelist?
Jane Hamilton.
Okay.
And then...
She encouraged me to go away and get a fellowship.
This was as out of character for me as beginning to study classical ballet at the age of 40.
I mean, the idea of me going to an art colony made me laugh like a fool.
You know, I'm a reporter, and I certainly knew that I would be the sparrow among all the peacocks in the art.
And so, but I did do it, and I wrote 70 pages.
And then I sent them to my agent, to whom I had not sent a book in 10 years, though we were good friends.
90% of the deal right there.
You kind of have that agent.
Having her, well, agent in my case should be spelled angel.
I mean, my agent is... Good quote, good quote.
...peerless.
She's peerless.
Um...
She is compassionate and wonderful and tough, and I love her.
But she... She's named in the acknowledgments, I think, right?
Jane Gelfand.
Yeah.
She sent it back for me to double-space it so that it would look longer.
And then a month later, she sold it to the first person.
Not even a month.
A couple of weeks later, she sold it to the first person she showed it to.
That's spectacular.
It's nutty.
And for the numbers that have been reported to.
And for those that are correct, yes.
Yeah.
It's a two-book deal, right?
Two-book deal.
And?
I'm currently working on the second one.
I'm working on it.
Not working.
Well, thinking.
You know, they say a writer is not always writing when he or she is writing.
But I'm writing the second one.
Well, I mean, to go back to the dream, where do you suppose that came from?
I'm sure it came out of the things that devil me most.
as a mother and as a reporter.
What was that verb again?
D-E-V-I-L.
Okay, yeah.
You know, cases of missing children have a peculiar... Is that a verb, by the way, devil?
Devil?
Yeah, okay, go ahead.
Devil me.
Okay.
I don't know if that's a usage that's common.
It's just my... No, no, that's cool.
That's fine.
I'm thinking when I transcribe the tape, that's all.
Go ahead.
That...
they have a particular quality of yearning and haunting that sticks with you as a journalist.
And certainly the cases in Minnesota, like the Jacob Wetterling case and other cases, had stayed with me for a long time as a journalist.
As a mother who had both given birth to children and then adopted children as well,
I often wonder about and turn over in my mind what makes us who we are, whether it's what happens to us or the way that we're born.
And so those ideas were in there.
So, I mean, and also grief.
I mean, clearly when I started to write this book, I was badly grieving for my husband, who'd been sort of the one constant of my adult life.
I mean, we've been together...
married for 13 years, but together for, you know, 16 or 17.
And, you know, I was trying to sort out how I was, what I was going to do with this leftover 40 years or so.
Amazing.
And you talk about grief, and we just see the events of the last couple days, and these people in that town in Pennsylvania, it's just, you know, I've got kids that age.
Yes, a lot.
You know, so the French club is going on a trip.
I mean, God, you know.
Well, and that too.
I mean, one of the things that has always moved me most is that the big things happen in a second.
You don't get to build up to them.
You don't get to go to training.
You know, they happen and then your whole life is before and after.
You know, did you see John Chancellor's obituary a week or so ago?
I saw one of them in Newsweek, but I don't think I know what you're referring to.
Well, there was a final quote, and I've interviewed John Chancellor a couple times and really had the greatest regard for him.
Yeah, very classic guy.
But his final quote was, he said, if you want to make God laugh, tell him your plans.
Right.
And he said that while he had cancer, you know, while he was suffering with cancer.
But go ahead, I'm sorry.
That's absolutely the case, isn't it?
That's it.
Go figure.
Try and plot your course for the next 10 years.
Try and plot it for the next two years.
Who knows?
I mean, your life has taken so many... So many, as many twists and downs as that family in the now.
Yeah.
Though of different kinds.
And so I know that...
that you know you have to pick um essentially pick out a couple of true things going back to you know when we talk about
the response of the publisher and and uh and of course advances are just the numbers but in terms of a hundred thousand copies and and with the audience did you see this as an entertainment were you trying to where are you know again you said you didn't have a you didn't perceive it as a commercial work but but you certainly must have had an idea of what you were doing i'm not saying that i didn't want to no i mean i didn't understand the
How big the commercial potential was for it is what I meant.
But I mean in terms of what you were writing.
I wanted it to be an entertainment.
I wanted it to be a great big-shouldered hunk of book.
Brought a little bit of bite to it.
Yeah.
I wanted it to be a book that you could take to a cabin for two days and get lost in.
Those are the kind of books that I grew up liking, you know, big Midwestern novels, you know, Edna Ferber and Wallace Stegner and Jane Smiley and, you know.
You see, and you would consider, if you were to describe yourself, you would describe yourself as a Midwestern writer?
Oh, sure.
That's great.
I do have some Midwestern newspapers, by the way, so why don't you give me a little bit of your biography here?
Well, I come from the west side of Chicago.
and grew up there in the Italians and Irish neighborhoods, and grew up very much in the rhythms of that part of the country.
Now I live in Wisconsin, which is in its own way a very different kind of Midwestern experience, but still has the same kind of boldness and also a certain lack of cynicism.
That, to me, distinguishes this part of the country.
And how about schooling?
Where did you go to schools?
I went to school at the University of Illinois.
I see.
And may as well just do the biographical stuff quickly.
And you've been a journalist for... I've been a journalist, oh boy, for 21 years.
Really?
In the Midwest?
43 years old.
Uh-huh.
And I have five children ranging in age from seven months to 21 years.
God bless you.
Thank you.
I'm sorry, I interrupted the flow there, but that is stuff that I... That's all right.
But I wanted... I mean, I'm not saying that I...
I'm not saying I am in their tradition.
Don't get me wrong.
I mean, I'm not.
Well, it's what you aspire to, certainly.
Oh, certainly.
If I were to ask you who your models were, you'd probably name the authors you just named, you know?
Yeah, those are my role models.
Sure.
I would love to stand in the same federal building with them.
Yeah, I'm not saying that I'm David McCullough, but I sure as hell would like to write like him, you know.
And, you know, that's the kind of work you try and do.
So that's, I respect that.
And so what do you think the next novel is going to do?
Well, I already know because I dream about it.
Another dream, huh?
Tell me what kind of sleeping pills you've been taking.
I swear to God.
I mean, you know, more people, more of my friends have said that to me.
I mean, they just, you know, if they didn't know me so well, they'd think I was making it up.
But I had this dream about six, you know, about three weeks ago.
Oh, great.
Yeah.
I mean, I was doing a lot of sleeping, let me tell you.
But it's about a young woman, very young woman, you know, like a 15-year-old and her relationship with an older woman who's a lawyer that centers on a predicament that the young girl gets into, which sort of amounts to being
Not just like the bad date, but like the bad date from the moon.
The worst possible, it's not incest or abuse or anything like that, but the worst possible consuming kind of relationship.
And how an older woman in her life helps her outgrow it, though not without enormous regrets.
From these two dreams, did you have the titles as well?
Yeah.
Really?
Uh-huh.
Not for the—the first one had a really mutt title.
You know, I did dream the title, and it was at the time of the reunion, which I intended to mean—well, it's obvious, but it was a crummy title.
And then my little boy thought up the deep end of the ocean.
Really?
Yeah.
then five-year-old.
Isn't that great?
Yeah.
Great title.
I claim no credit for it, but he thought it up.
This other one, the title in the dream was actually better.
And how about the characters and the characters' names and their voices, all this you've heard?
Uh-huh.
No kidding.
But if I ever, it must be, I think it must be that vitamin, you know, that vitamin now, melanin.
Oh, why not?
Sure.
It must be it.
Now, is your background Italian-American?
No, I was, my married name is Allegretti.
I see.
My husband was Italian.
Okay.
And I grew up... Wait, is Misha a French?
Is that a French name?
It's Canadian.
Canadian?
Canadian.
Okay.
And just looking at Beth Cappadora, that's all.
That's why I'm... Yeah, that means hat of gold.
There you go.
Excellent.
I think I've got plenty of stuff here.
You're very nice to do this.
I appreciate it.
Well, thanks.
We did just put this together yesterday, so normally I'm a lot better prepared than I am right now.
And I assure you the book will be thoroughly read before I...
I'll take it with me down the Cape this weekend.
That's the place to do it.
Yeah, well, I'll do it.
A buddy of mine lives out on the Cape, a close friend of mine.
Who's that?
Anne LeClaire.
I don't know her.
No, but I know her work.
I don't know her, but I'm certainly familiar with her work.
So I'm going to New York next week to interview Mario Puzo.
It's a kind of new book, The Last Dawn.
I've heard about this.
And it's not bad.
I always thought he was a pretty good writer, actually.
This book is good.
I mean, I thought he had a couple of flops after The Godfather, but hey, 76, you know, give me a break.
Well, like my father says, if you're not gigging, you're dying.
There you go.
So I'll be doing that.
And I hope at some point you'll be reading my stuff in the Madison paper.
It sounds pretty good, but you never know it until you know it, you know.
Yeah.
Well, you know, good luck to you.
Thanks.
And if you need anything from this part of the country, you know, I'm here.
Terrific.
And I'll make sure Chair Sheets gets to Rachel, and I'm sure she'll pass them on to you.
All right.
Thanks a lot.
Take care.
Good luck to you.
Bye.
Bye-bye.